<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com"
	xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"
	xml:lang="en">
	<teiHeader>
		<fileDesc>
			<titleStmt>
				<title level="a" type="main">Desferroxamine infusion increases cerebral blood flow:
					a potential association with hypoxia-inducible transcription factor 1</title>
			</titleStmt>
			<sourceDesc>
				<biblStruct>
					<analytic>
						<author>
							<persName>
								<forename type="first">Farzaneh</forename>
								<forename type="middle">A</forename>
								<surname>Sorond</surname>
							</persName>
						</author>
						<author>
							<persName>
								<forename type="first">Michele</forename>
								<forename type="middle">L</forename>
								<surname>Shaffer</surname>
							</persName>
						</author>
						<author>
							<persName>
								<forename type="first">Andrew</forename>
								<forename type="middle">L</forename>
								<surname>Kung</surname>
							</persName>
						</author>
						<author>
							<persName>
								<forename type="first">Lewis</forename>
								<forename type="middle">A</forename>
								<surname>Lipsitz</surname>
							</persName>
						</author>
						<title level="a" type="main">Desferroxamine infusion increases cerebral
							blood flow: a potential association with hypoxia-inducible transcription
							factor 1</title>
					</analytic>
					<monogr>
						<title level="j" type="main">Clin. Sci.</title>
						<idno type="ISSN">0143-5221</idno>
						<imprint>
							<publisher>Portland Press Limited</publisher>
							<date type="publication" when="2008-11-18"/>
						</imprint>
					</monogr>
					<idno type="PII">CS20080320</idno>
					<idno type="DOI">10.1042/CS20080320</idno>
				</biblStruct>
			</sourceDesc>
		</fileDesc>
		<profileDesc>
			<langUsage>
				<language ident="en"/>
			</langUsage>
		</profileDesc>
		<revisionDesc>
			<change when="2008-07-17">Received</change>
			<change when="2008-10-09">Revised</change>
			<change when="2008-11-18">Accepted</change>
		</revisionDesc>
	</teiHeader>
	<text>
		<front>
			<div type="abstract">
				<head>Abstract</head>
				<p>Finding an effective means to improve cerebral perfusion during hypoxic-ischemic
					stress is essential for neuroprotection. Studies in animal models of stroke have
					shown that Desferroxamine activates hypoxia inducible transcription factor-1,
					reduces brain damage and promotes functional recovery. Our study was designed to
					investigate the effects of Desferroxamine infusion on the cerebral circulation
					in humans. Fifteen volunteers were enrolled in a randomized double-blinded
					placebo controlled crossover study. We measured cerebral blood flow velocity by
					transcranial Doppler ultrasonography in the middle cerebral artery, arterial
					blood pressure, end-tidal CO2, as well as hypoxia inducible transcription
					factor-1 protein and serum lactate dehydrogenase concentrations in response to 8
					hours of Desferroxamine versus placebo infusion. Cerebrovascular resistance was
					calculated from the ratio of steady state beat-to-beat values for blood pressure
					to blood flow velocity. We found that Desferroxamine infusion was associated
					with a significant cerebral vasodilation. Moreover, decreased cerebrovascular
					resistance was temporally correlated with increased hypoxia inducible
					transcription factor-1 protein concentration as well as hypoxia inducible
					transcription factor-1 transcriptional activation as measured by serum lactate
					dehydrogenase concentration. Our findings provide preliminary data suggesting
					that activators of hypoxia inducible transcription factor-1, such as
					Desferroxamine, may protect neurons against ischemic injury by dilating cerebral
					vessels and enhancing cerebral perfusion.</p>
			</div>
		</front>
	</text>
</TEI>
