<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com"
	xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
	<teiHeader>
		<fileDesc>
			<titleStmt>
				<title level="a" type="main">Congenital aortic valvar stenosis: limited progression
					during childhood</title>
			</titleStmt>
			<publicationStmt>
				<availability>
					<p>Permissions: true</p>
				</availability>
			</publicationStmt>
			<sourceDesc>
				<biblStruct type="article">
					<analytic>
						<author type="corresp">
							<persName>
								<forename type="first">Arend Derk Jan</forename>
								<surname>Ten Harkel</surname>
								<roleName type="degree">Dr</roleName>
							</persName>
							<affiliation>
								<orgName type="institution">Erasmus MC-Sophia</orgName>
								<address><addrLine>Dr Molewaterplein 50</addrLine><settlement>Rotterdam</settlement><country>Netherlands</country><postCode>3015GJ</postCode></address>
							</affiliation>
							<note type="phone">+31 10 - 4636363</note>
							<note type="fax">+3015 GJ 10 - 4636772</note>
							<email>a.d.j.ten_harkel@lumc.nl</email>
						</author>
						<author>
							<persName>Maarten Berkhout</persName>
							<affiliation>
								<orgName type="institution">Erasmus MC-Sophia</orgName>
							</affiliation>
						</author>
						<author>
							<persName>Wim C Hop</persName>
							<affiliation>
								<orgName type="institution">Erasmus MC-Sophia</orgName>
							</affiliation>
						</author>
						<author>
							<persName>Maarten Witsenburg</persName>
							<affiliation>
								<orgName type="institution">Erasmus MC-Sophia</orgName>
							</affiliation>
						</author>
						<author>
							<persName>Willem A Helbing</persName>
							<affiliation>
								<orgName type="institution">Erasmus MC-Sophia</orgName>
							</affiliation>
						</author>
						<title level="a" type="main">Congenital aortic valvar stenosis: limited
							progression during childhood</title>
						<title level="a" type="short">Limited progression of aortic stenosis in
							children</title>
					</analytic>
					<monogr>
						<imprint>
							<date type="Accepted" when="2009-02-17"/>
						</imprint>
					</monogr>
					<idno type="DOI">10.1136/adc.2007.134924</idno>
					<idno type="manuscript">ADC/2007/134924</idno>
				</biblStruct>
			</sourceDesc>
		</fileDesc>
		<profileDesc>
			<textClass>
				<keywords>
					<list>
						<item>
							<term>Cardiology</term>
						</item>
						<item>
							<term>Congenital Abnorm</term>
						</item>
						<item>
							<term>Aortic valvar stenosis</term>
						</item>
						<item>
							<term>Follow-up study</term>
						</item>
						<item>
							<term>Intervention</term>
						</item>
						<note type="manuscript-type">Original Article</note>
					</list>
				</keywords>
			</textClass>
		</profileDesc>
		<revisionDesc>
			<change when="2007-11-22">Submitted</change>
			<change when="2008-11-04">Revised</change>
			<change when="2009-02-27">Accepted</change>
		</revisionDesc>
	</teiHeader>
	<text>
		<front>
			<div type="abstract">
				<head>Abstract</head>
				<p>Objective Congenital valvular aortic stenosis is a common congenital heart
					malformation. The rate of progression in childhood, however, remains to be
					established. We assessed progression of peak aortic velocity before intervention
					as well as frequency of intervention in pediatric patients with isolated
					congenital valvular aortic stenosis. Patients and Methods A retrospective cohort
					study was performed in 245 consecutive patients with aortic stenosis. Both
					clinical and echocardiographic data were obtained. Results Over a period of
					9.0±5.2 years (range 0.1-19.4) mean annual increase of peak systolic velocity
					was 0.04 m/sec/year (95% confidence interval 0.028 to 0.056 m/sec/year;
					P&lt;0.001) as shown by Anova. Forty patients underwent any cardiac
					intervention shortly after their first echocardiogram. Another 33 patients
					underwent intervention during follow-up. Interventions were performed
					significantly more often in patients diagnosed at younger age and/or with a
					higher peak velocity at diagnosis (P&lt;0.001). Mortality was considerable
					in those diagnosed in infancy (five-year survival 73±9%), whereas it was nearly
					absent in patients diagnosed after infancy. Most patients who died during
					infancy had progressive left ventricular dysfunction despite adequate relief of
					LV outflow obstruction. Conclusions Valvular aortic stenosis in the pediatric
					age group usually has a good prognosis beyond neonatal age. Progression over
					time is usually limited, although a considerable proportion of patients need any
					intervention shortly after the initial diagnosis. Mortality, except for the
					neonatal age group, is nearly absent.</p>
			</div>
		</front>
		<body/>
		<back/>
	</text>
</TEI>
