<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com"
    xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title level="a" type="main">Monumental geographies: re-situating the state</title>
            </titleStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <biblStruct type="article">
                    <analytic>
                        <author>
                            <persName>
                                <forename type="first">James</forename>
                                <forename type="middle">D.</forename>
                                <surname>Sidaway</surname>
                            </persName>
                        </author>
                        <author>
                            <persName>
                                <forename type="first">Peter</forename>
                                <surname>Mayell</surname>
                            </persName>
                            <affiliation>School of Geography, University of Plymouth, UK; National
                                Centre for Research on Europe, University of Canterbury,
                                Christchurch, New Zealand</affiliation>
                        </author>
                        <title level="a" type="main">Monumental geographies: re-situating the
                            state</title>
                    </analytic>
                    <monogr>
                        <title level="j" type="main">Cultural Geographies</title>
                        <idno type="ISSN">1474-4740</idno>
                        <imprint>
                            <publisher>Sage Publications</publisher>
                            <pubPlace>Sage CA: Thousand Oaks, CA</pubPlace>
                            <biblScope type="vol">14</biblScope>
                            <biblScope type="issue">1</biblScope>
                            <date type="publication" when="2007-01-01"/>
                            <biblScope type="fpage">148</biblScope>
                            <biblScope type="lpage">155</biblScope>
                        </imprint>
                    </monogr>
                    <idno type="doi">10.1177/1474474007072824</idno>
                </biblStruct>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
    </teiHeader>
    <text>
        <front/>
        <body>
            <div type="fullText">
                <head>Full text</head>
                <p> cultural geographies in practice Monumental geographies: re-situating the state
                    James D. Sidaway, Peter Mayell School of Geography, University of Plymouth, UK
                    National Centre for Research on Europe, University of Canterbury, Christchurch,
                    New Zealand A radical review of the proposed memorial at the site of the
                    destroyed World Trade Centre was under way yesterday after it emerged that the
                    current plans could cost $1bn (£540m) to complete. . . . The New York Daily News
                    condemned the $1bn figure as 'unaffordable, impractical [and] rather shocking'.
                    The New York Times, which obtained a confidential memo revealing the estimate,
                    called it 'breathtaking'.1 In the light of such a revelation that the cost of
                    the proposed memorial to the immediate victims of '9/11' was double earlier
                    estimates, and in view of ongoing controversy over its format and style, the
                    'big picture' of official memorials and associated narratives of memorialization
                    remains in critical focus. The former site of the 'twin towers' will inevitably
                    attract much more scrutiny in years to come. The memorial there will become
                    emblematic of what is widely seen as a defining moment of the new century. In
                    this, a voluminous critical literature on monuments and memory will no doubt be
                    drawn upon. In tandem with historians and cultural critics, cultural and
                    political geographers have long scrutinized other monuments as embodiments of
                    official memory and mission. Memorials and monuments in sites as widespread as
                    South Africa, Russia and Scotland have been examined as icons of
                    nation-building.2 This work has explored the ways in which the entire layout and
                    function of a capital city, its distribution of monuments and public buildings,
                    can very often become an exercise in national ideology and power. Such monuments
                    are invariably designed to be substantial and permanent structures: in Nuala
                    Johnston's words, they are national artefacts 'cast in stone'.3 This
                    codification is what makes changes in their function, or outright destruction
                    (by insurgents during a war or revolution), such potent symbols of the struggle
                    for and expression of power, and is the reason why their meaning is frequently
                    contested.4 The focus on such official memorialization rightly remains
                    important. Moving beyond these, however, David Simpson has recently examined the
                    wider culture of # 2007 SAGE Publications 10.1177/1474474007072824 cultural
                    geographies 2007 14: 148Á155 commemoration around 9/11 in the United States,
                    looking beyond official statements, acts and sites to the popular imagination
                    (hence his study of obituaries for 9/11 victims that appeared in the New York
                    Times). Simpson is concerned with: the location of 9/11 within the longstanding
                    rituals and short-term political strategies that it embodies and enables: so we
                    have sacred ground, Ground Zero . . . to the Freedom Tower itself. All of these
                    terms, and others like them, have already been naturalized and pass without
                    question in the national media and popular imagination.5 In broader terms,
                    Kenneth Foote explores varied landscapes of violence and tragedy in America
                    (disasters, battles and murder) noting how their sites are variously designated,
                    sanctified, venerated, rectified or obliterated in complex manoeuvres and
                    contests of memory and forgetting.6 Yet it remains very easy to overlook those
                    forms of memorialization which both lack official sanction and sponsorship and
                    are temporary. The 'memorial' at the wire fence surrounding the reconstruction
                    site at 'Ground Zero' is one example (Figure 1).7 Celebrating an Anglo-American
                    common- ality and alliance, evoking a past and future alliance, this 'memorial'
                    has (in common with many others, as it turns out) a personal and temporary
                    character. This impromptu memorial has something in common with a flower at a
                    grave or a funeral, but it is placed at what is not (yet) an official site of
                    memory, grave or memorial. In its unauthorized and public character, the
                    'memorial' has something in common with graffiti (which has been examined by
                    geographers as a manifestation of dissent and transgression8 ), yet it is
                    clearly not reducible to that genre. Nor is it simply a personal memorial (in
                    the style of flowers at the site of a fatal accident or at a favourite site
                    where a named deceased person once enjoyed being), yet nor is it wholly separate
                    from (by virtue of its location) official memorializations.9 This 'memorial'
                    will have gone long before these words and the reproduction of it appear here,
                    only to be replaced by other similar artefacts. Through its reproduction here,
                    it also acquires a digital and printed permanence, along with thousands of other
                    images which extend the memorialization through time and space (something which
                    will remain largely beyond our scope here).10 It is, however, one of hundreds of
                    others that have Á in their collective presence Á become part of the memory of
                    9/11 (see Figure 2). As Robert S. Nelson and Margaret Olin noted: Attached to
                    the barricades around 'Ground Zero,' or placed on bus stops, hospitals and other
                    public surfaces, fliers of the 'missing' appeared, beginning on the day of the
                    attack. Soon, makeshift memorials formed beneath and around these photocopied
                    photographs. Scraps of paper were added, containing messages. Flowers, too, were
                    taped to them. . . . Two months after the attacks, some ideas for permanent
                    memorials began to make reference to these.11 With these (and other analogous)
                    artifacts in mind, we might therefore propose a typology of monuments and
                    memorials. This is done in the hope of shifting the balance of scrutiny somewhat
                    towards the temporary and unofficial and away from a de facto hierarchy in which
                    all that seems to matter is the official and the state. Thus, we might propose
                    (with caveats about overlaps and hybrids) that critical attention be given to a
                    broad range of memorial artefacts. At least five overlapping styles and forms
                    might be identified. 149 Sidaway and Mayell: Monumental geographies First, there
                    are the official or 'public' monuments, cast in stone, which have long been the
                    focus of most critical work. A monument to Kemal Atatu¨rk (the founding figure
                    of Turkish nationalism), for example, proclaims the good fortune of being a Turk
                    (Figure 3). Turkey contains thousands of such statues; however, this one is
                    located in the 'Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus' (a territory whose
                    sovereign status is not formally recognized by anywhere other than Turkey).
                    Second, however, are the informal collective monuments, which nevertheless
                    bolster a hegemonic ideology and are tolerated by the state. One example is a
                    memorial, located near the centre of Nicosia, to Greek Cypriots who disappeared
                    in 1974, during the Turkish invasion and occupation of northern Cyprus (Figure
                    4). On occasion, this genre merges with advertisements and corporate cultures.
                    In tandem with these (and this is the third 'category') are unauthorized
                    collective monuments, placed as a protest or challenge to official memory. The
                    classic example was the 'Goddess of Democracy FIGURE 1 The 'memorial' at the
                    wire fence surrounding 'Ground Zero' 150 cultural geographies 14(1) FIGURE 2
                    'Ground Zero' memorials FIGURE 3 Monument to Kemal Atatu¨rk 151 Sidaway and
                    Mayell: Monumental geographies and Freedom' that appeared in Tiananmen Square,
                    Beijing, during the demonstrations of 1989, of which only images and
                    reproductions now remain.12 The Republican political murals in Northern Ireland
                    are related to this genre.13 A more ambiguous case (since it is tolerated by
                    authorities and has been a site for church-sanctioned acts of memorial, for
                    example) is the shrine-like memorial, to Jean Charles de Menezes at Stockwell
                    tube (underground railway) station in London, near to the site where this
                    Brazilian electrician was shot and killed on 22 July 2005 by the police (who
                    later claimed to have mistaken him for a terrorist about to detonate a bomb).
                    Fourthly, there are unauthorized individual monuments. These may relate to, but
                    are not simply reducible to, the hegemonic ideology (as in Figure 1). Finally,
                    there are also more anti-hegemonic 'individually' made monuments, which make
                    some form of critique and which might often merge with graffiti. Inevitably,
                    this range is schematic, and many artefacts will cross the boundaries, or will
                    not fit neatly in any single category. Moreover, categories such as individual
                    and collective, public, private, and state are both fluid and highly debatable
                    in critical analysis; indeed, one promising domain of critical analysis is to
                    examine how FIGURE 4 Memorial to Greek Cypriots who disappeared in 1974 152
                    cultural geographies 14(1) they exist in complex relationship to each other. As
                    Habermas reminds us, the usage of the words 'public' and 'public sphere' betrays
                    a multiplicity of concurrent meanings. We call events and occasions 'public'
                    when they are open to all, in contrast to closed or exclusive affairs . . . But
                    as in the expression 'public building', the term need not refer to general
                    accessibility: the building does not even have to be open to public traffic.
                    'Public buildings' simply house state institutions and as such are 'public'. The
                    state is the 'public authority'.14 This attentiveness to the diverse meanings of
                    the word 'public' could be fruitfully coupled with a reconsideration of the
                    dominant focus on state led and official memorializations. Foucault famously
                    argued that in our political analysis we are yet to cut off the king's head:
                    that our critical horizons remained focused on the holding of state power.
                    Foucault turns instead to the modes by which power is expressed 'through
                    progressively finer channels, gaining access to individuals themselves, to their
                    bodies, their gestures and all their daily actions'.15 Taking this seriously
                    means that the state is thereby resituated in critical scrutiny of monuments and
                    memorials. While typologies are useful devices for recognizing the
                    distinctiveness of the particular, there is much to be gained from opening our
                    eyes and sensibilities to a fuller range of memorial artefacts where the public
                    and private, the geopolitical and 'personal', interact, affect and are
                    performed.16 Biographical notes James D. Sidaway is Professor of Human Geography
                    at the University of Plymouth. He has previously taught geography at the
                    Universities of Birmingham, Reading, Loughborough and the National University of
                    Singapore. He can be contacted at: School of Geography, University of Plymouth,
                    Drake Circus, Plymouth, PL4 8AA, UK; email: james.sidaway@plymouth.ac.uk Peter
                    Mayell at the time of writing was a graduate student at the National Centre for
                    Research on Europe at the University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
                    He is currently working for New Zealand Cricket. He can be contacted at:
                    pmayell@nzcricket.org.nz Notes 1 O. Burkeman, 'Ground Zero rethink after cost
                    soars to $1bn', Guardian (6 May 2006), p. 19. 2 For accounts from Italy, South
                    Africa and Scotland, see: D. Atkinson and D. Cosgrove, 'Urban rhetoric and
                    embodied identities: city, nation and empire at the Vittorio Emanuele II
                    Monument in Rome, 1870Á1945', Annals of the Association of American Geographers
                    88 (1998), pp. 28Á49; A. Crampton, 'The Voortrekker monument, the birth of
                    apartheid, and beyond', Political geography 20 (2001), pp. 221Á46; C. Withers,
                    'Place, memory, monument: memorialising the past in contemporary highland
                    Scotland', Ecumene 3 (1996), pp. 325Á44. 153 Sidaway and Mayell: Monumental
                    geographies There are dozens of other case studies. In a related vein, others
                    have investigated how broader architectural projects/plans are frequently
                    pervaded by national-political expressions: see D. McNeill and M. Tewdwar-Jones,
                    'Architecture, banal nationalism and re-territorialization', International
                    journal of urban and regional research 27 (2003), pp. 738Á43. 3 N. Johnston,
                    'Cast in stone: monuments, geography, and nationalism', Environment and planning
                    D: society and space 13 (1995), pp. 51Á65. 4 For an example of such contest, see
                    H. Muzaini and B. S. A. Yeoh, 'War landscapes as ''battlefields'' of collective
                    memories: reading the Reflections at Bukit Chandu, Singapore', Cultural
                    geographies 12 (2005), pp. 345Á65. 5 D. Simpson, 9/11: the culture of
                    commemoration (Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2006), p. 17. 6 K. E.
                    Foote, Shadowed ground: America's landscapes of violence and tragedy (Austin,
                    University of Texas Press, 1997). 7 The photographs in Figures 1Á4 were taken by
                    the authors, James D. Sidaway and Peter Mayell. In a key case study that also
                    contains a broader review of relevant literatures than can be made here, Simpson
                    and Corbridge study 'the period between the [key] event and its public
                    memorialization Á between what might be called the signifier and the signified.
                    During this time memorial practices grew out of numerous private and small-scale
                    projects . . .' See Simpson, E. and Corbrige, S. The geography of things that
                    may become memories: the 2001 earthquake in Kachchh-Gujarat and the politics of
                    rehabilitation in the prememorial era, Annals of the Association of American
                    Geographers 93 (2006), p. 566. 8 T. Cresswell, In place/out of place: geography,
                    ideology and transgression (Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press, 1996). 9
                    D. Hook, 'Monumental space and the uncanny', Geoforum 36 (2005), pp. 688Á704, is
                    a suggestive account of the relationships between monuments and the production
                    of subjectivity. 10 e.g. http://911digitalarchive.org/ and
                    http://www.sep11photo.org/ 11 R. S. Nelson and M. Olin, eds, Monuments and
                    memory, made and unmade (Chicago, University of Chicago Press), pp. 322Á3. 12
                    Outside China (where the site is blocked), images of this may be viewed at
                    http:// en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goddess_of_Democracy. 13 Examples may be viewed at
                    http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/murals. 14 J. Habermas, The structural transformation of
                    the public sphere (Cambridge, Polity Press, 1989), pp. 1Á2. Habermas goes on to
                    problematize and historicize categories such as public, private, intimate,
                    family, individual, civil society, and the state. A similar gesture
                    characterizes Althusser's exploration of 'ideological state apparatus'. 15 M.
                    Foucault, Power/knowledge: selected interviews and other writings 1972-1977, ed.
                    C. Gordon (New York, Pantheon, 1980). 16 The notion of 'affect' as a critical
                    shorthand for the emotive-psychological level of being and politics has recently
                    and productively been explored in the geopolitical arena by G. O' Tuathail,
                    'Just out looking for a fight: American affect and the invasion of Iraq',
                    Antipode 35 (2003), pp. 856Á70, and S. Carter and D. P. McCormack, 'Film,
                    geopolitics and the affective logics of intervention', Political geography 25
                    (2006), pp. 228Á45. Nigel Thrift had earlier called for critical work on
                    geopolitics to move beyond a focus on 'the big picture' to consider more mundane
                    and apparently trivial moments within geopolitical discourse and action: 'It's
                    the little things', in D. Atkinson and K. Dodds, eds, Geopolitical traditions: a
                    century of geopolitical thought (London, Routledge, 2000), pp. 380Á87.
                    Suggestive work on performance and psychogeography might also be brought to bear
                    here. For two paths of 154 cultural geographies 14(1) departure, see D. Pinder,
                    'Ghostly footsteps: voices, memories and walks in the city', Ecumene 8 (2001),
                    pp. 1Á19, and B. Reid, '''A profound edge'': performative negotiations of
                    Belfast', Cultural geographies 12 (2005), pp. 485-506. See too Robert
                    Macfarlane's critical review of Iain Sinclair's London psychogeographical
                    excursions, Times Literary Supplement (7 Oct. 2005), pp. 3Á4. 155 Sidaway and
                    Mayell: Monumental geographies</p>
            </div>
        </body>
        <back>
            <div type="notes">
                <note>1 O. Burkeman, 'Ground Zero rethink after cost soars to $1bn', Guardian (6 May
                    2006), p. 19.</note>
                <note>2 For accounts from Italy, South Africa and Scotland, see: D. Atkinson and D.
                    Cosgrove, 'Urban rhetoric and embodied identities: city, nation and empire at
                    the Vittorio Emanuele II Monument in Rome, 1870-1945', <hi rend="italic">Annals
                        of the Association of American Geographers</hi> 88 (1998), pp. 28-49; A.
                    Crampton, 'The Voortrekker monument, the birth of apartheid, and beyond', <hi
                        rend="italic">Political geography</hi> 20 (2001), pp. 221-46; C. Withers,
                    'Place, memory, monument: memorialising the past in contemporary highland
                    Scotland', Ecumene 3 (1996), pp. 325-44.</note>
                <note>There are dozens of other case studies. In a related vein, others have
                    investigated how broader architectural projects/plans are frequently pervaded by
                    national-political expressions: see D. McNeill and M. Tewdwar-Jones,
                    'Architecture, banal nationalism and re-territorialization', International
                    journal of urban and regional research 27 (2003), pp. 738-43.</note>
                <note>3 N. Johnston, 'Cast in stone: monuments, geography, and nationalism', <hi
                        rend="italic">Environment and planning D: society and space</hi> 13 (1995),
                    pp. 51-65.</note>
                <note>4 For an example of such contest, see H. Muzaini and B. S. A. Yeoh, 'War
                    landscapes as "battlefields" of collective memories: reading the Reflections at
                    Bukit Chandu, Singapore', <hi rend="italic">Cultural geographies</hi> 12 (2005),
                    pp. 345-65.</note>
                <note>5 D. Simpson, 9/11: the culture of commemoration (Chicago, University of
                    Chicago Press, 2006), p. 17.</note>
                <note>6 K. E. Foote, <hi rend="italic">Shadowed ground: America's landscapes of
                        violence and tragedy</hi> (Austin, University of Texas Press, 1997).</note>
                <note>7 The photographs in Figures 1-4 were taken by the authors, James D. Sidaway
                    and Peter Mayell. In a key case study that also contains a broader review of
                    relevant literatures than can be made here, Simpson and Corbridge study 'the
                    period between the [key] event and its public memorialization-between what might
                    be called the signifier and the signified. During this time memorial practices
                    grew out of numerous private and small-scale projects...' See Simpson, E. and
                    Corbrige, S. The geography of things that may become memories: the 2001
                    earthquake in Kachchh-Gujarat and the politics of rehabilitation in the
                    prememorial era, Annals of the Association of American Geographers 93 (2006), p.
                    566.</note>
                <note>8 T. Cresswell, <hi rend="italic">In place/out of place: geography, ideology
                        and transgression</hi> (Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press,
                    1996).</note>
                <note>9 D. Hook, 'Monumental space and the uncanny', <hi rend="italic">Geoforum</hi>
                    36 (2005), pp. 688-704, is a suggestive account of the relationships between
                    monuments and the production of subjectivity.</note>
                <note>10 e.g. http://911digitalarchive.org/ and http://www.sep11photo.org/</note>
                <note>11 R. S. Nelson and M. Olin, eds, Monuments and memory, made and unmade
                    (Chicago, University of Chicago Press), pp. 322-3.</note>
                <note>12 Outside China (where the site is blocked), images of this may be viewed at
                    http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goddess_of_Democracy.</note>
                <note>13 Examples may be viewed at http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/murals.</note>
                <note>14 J. Habermas, <hi rend="italic">The structural transformation of the public
                        sphere</hi> (Cambridge, Polity Press, 1989), pp. 1-2. Habermas goes on to
                    problematize and historicize categories such as public, private, intimate,
                    family, individual, civil society, and the state. A similar gesture
                    characterizes Althusser's exploration of 'ideological state apparatus'.</note>
                <note>15 M. Foucault, <hi rend="italic">Power/knowledge: selected interviews and
                        other writings 1972-1977</hi>, ed. C. Gordon (New York, Pantheon,
                    1980).</note>
                <note>16 The notion of 'affect' as a critical shorthand for the
                    emotive-psychological level of being and politics has recently and productively
                    been explored in the geopolitical arena by G. O' Tuathail, 'Just out looking for
                    a fight: American affect and the invasion of Iraq', <hi rend="italic"
                        >Antipode</hi> 35 (2003), pp. 856-70, and S. Carter and D. P. McCormack,
                    'Film, geopolitics and the affective logics of intervention', <hi rend="italic"
                        >Political geography</hi> 25 (2006), pp. 228-45. Nigel Thrift had earlier
                    called for critical work on geopolitics to move beyond a focus on 'the big
                    picture' to consider more mundane and apparently trivial moments within
                    geopolitical discourse and action: 'It's the little things', in D. Atkinson and
                    K. Dodds, eds, <hi rend="italic">Geopolitical traditions: a century of
                        geopolitical thought</hi> (London, Routledge, 2000), pp. 380-87. Suggestive
                    work on performance and psychogeography might also be brought to bear here. For
                    two paths of departure, see D. Pinder, 'Ghostly footsteps: voices, memories and
                    walks in the city', <hi rend="italic">Ecumene</hi> 8 (2001), pp. 1-19, and B.
                    Reid, "'A profound edge": performative negotiations of Belfast', <hi
                        rend="italic">Cultural geographies</hi> 12 (2005), pp. 485-506. See too
                    Robert Macfarlane's critical review of Iain Sinclair's London psychogeographical
                    excursions, <hi rend="italic">Times Literary Supplement</hi> (7 Oct. 2005), pp.
                    3-4.</note>
            </div>
        </back>
    </text>
</TEI>
