<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com"
    xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"
    xml:lang="en">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title level="a" type="main">Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic Model of Methyl
                    tertiary Butyl Ether and tertiary Butyl Alcohol Dosimetry in Male Rats Based on
                    Binding to α2u-Globulin</title>
            </titleStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <biblStruct>
                    <analytic>
                        <author type="corresp">
                            <persName>
                                <roleName type="salutation">Dr.</roleName>
                                <forename type="first">Teresa</forename>
                                <surname>Leavens</surname>
                                <roleName type="degree">PhD</roleName>
                            </persName>
                            <email>teresa_leavens@ncsu.edu</email>
                            <affiliation>
                                <orgName type="institution">North Carolina State
                                    University</orgName>
                                <orgName type="department">Population Health and
                                    Pathobiology</orgName>
                                <note type="phone">919-513-6446</note>
                                <note type="fax">919-513-6358</note>
                                <address><addrLine>College of Veterinary Medicine</addrLine><addrLine>4700 Hillsborough St</addrLine><settlement>Raleigh</settlement><region>North Carolina</region><country key="US">United States</country><postCode>27606</postCode></address>
                            </affiliation>
                        </author>
                        <author>
                            <persName>
                                <roleName type="salutation">Dr.</roleName>
                                <forename type="first">Susan</forename>
                                <forename type="middle">J.</forename>
                                <surname>Borghoff</surname>
                                <genName>PhD</genName>
                            </persName>
                            <email>sborghoff@ils-inc.com</email>
                            <note>imported for project id 505 on Sep 16, 2002, no letter sent</note>
                            <affiliation>
                                <orgName type="institution">Integrated Laboratory Systems,
                                    Inc.</orgName>
                                <address><settlement>Research Triangle Park</settlement><region>North Carolina</region><country key="US">United States</country></address>
                            </affiliation>
                        </author>
                        <title level="a" type="main">Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic Model of
                            Methyl tertiary Butyl Ether and tertiary Butyl Alcohol Dosimetry in Male
                            Rats Based on Binding to α2u-Globulin</title>
                    </analytic>
                    <monogr>
                        <title level="j" type="main">Toxicological Sciences</title>
                        <title level="j" type="issue">May 09</title>
                        <idno type="pISSN">1096-6080</idno>
                        <idno type="eISSN">N</idno>
                        <imprint>
                            <publisher>Toxicological Sciences</publisher>
                            <biblScope type="vol">109</biblScope>
                            <biblScope type="issue">1</biblScope>
                        </imprint>
                    </monogr>
                    <idno type="pii">TOXSCI-08-0820</idno>
                </biblStruct>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
    </teiHeader>
    <text>
        <front>
            <div type="abstract">
                <head>Abstract</head>
                <p>Current physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models for the fuel additive
                    methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE) and its metabolite tertiary butyl alcohol
                    (TBA) have not included a mechanism for chemical binding to the
                    male-rat-specific protein α2u-globulin, which has been postulated to be
                    responsible for renal effects in male rats observed in toxicity and
                    carcinogenicity studies with MTBE. The objective of this work was to expand the
                    previously published models for MTBE to include binding to α2u-globulin in the
                    kidney of male rats. In the model, metabolism of MTBE was assumed to occur only
                    in the liver via two saturable pathways. TBA metabolism was assumed to occur
                    only in the liver via one saturable, low-affinity pathway and to be inducible
                    following repeated exposures. The binding of MTBE and TBA to α2u-globulin was
                    modeled as saturable and competitive and was assumed to only affect the rate of
                    hydrolysis of α2u-globulin in the kidney. The developed model characterized the
                    differences in kidney concentrations of MTBE and TBA in male versus female rats
                    from inhalation exposures to MTBE, as well as the observed changes in blood and
                    tissue concentrations from repeated exposure to TBA. The model-predicted binding
                    affinity of MTBE to α2u-globulin was greater than TBA, and the hydrolysis rate
                    of chemically bound α2u-globulin was approximately 30% of the unbound protein.
                    This PBPK model supports the role of MTBE and TBA binding to the
                    male-rat-specific protein α2u-globulin as essential for predicting
                    concentrations of these chemicals in the kidney following exposure. </p>
            </div>
        </front>
        <body/>
        <back/>
    </text>
</TEI>
