<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com"
    xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"
    xml:lang="en">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title level="a" type="main">On divide-and-conquer strategies for parsimony analysis
                    of large data sets: Rec-I-DCM3 vs. TNT</title>
            </titleStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <biblStruct>
                    <analytic>
                        <author type="corresp">
                            <persName>
                                <roleName type="salutation">Mr.</roleName>
                                <forename type="first">Pablo</forename>
                                <forename type="middle">A.</forename>
                                <surname>Goloboff</surname>
                            </persName>
                            <email>pablogolo@csnat.unt.edu.ar</email>
                            <affiliation>
                                <orgName type="institution">INSUE-CONICET</orgName>
                                <note type="phone">+54-381-4232965</note>
                                <address><addrLine>Miguel Lillo 205</addrLine><settlement>San M. de Tucuman</settlement><country key="AR">Argentina</country><postCode>4000</postCode></address>
                            </affiliation>
                        </author>
                        <author>
                            <persName>
                                <roleName type="salutation">Dr.</roleName>
                                <forename type="first">Diego</forename>
                                <surname>Pol</surname>
                            </persName>
                            <email>dpol@mef.org.ar</email>
                            <email>dpol@amnh.org</email>
                            <affiliation>
                                <orgName type="institution">CONICET - Museo Paleontológico Egidio
                                    Feruglio</orgName>
                                <address><settlement>Trelew</settlement><region>Chubut</region><country key="AR">Argentina</country></address>
                            </affiliation>
                        </author>
                        <title level="a" type="main">On divide-and-conquer strategies for parsimony
                            analysis of large data sets: Rec-I-DCM3 vs. TNT</title>
                    </analytic>
                    <monogr>
                        <title level="j" type="main">Systematic Biology</title>
                        <idno type="pISSN">10635157</idno>
                        <idno type="eISSN">1076836X</idno>
                        <imprint>
                            <publisher>Systematic Biology</publisher>
                            <biblScope type="vol">56</biblScope>
                            <biblScope type="issue">3</biblScope>
                        </imprint>
                    </monogr>
                    <idno type="pii">USYB-2006-170</idno>
                </biblStruct>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
    </teiHeader>
    <text>
        <front>
            <div type="abstract">
                <head>Abstract</head>
                <p>Roshan et al. recently described a "divide-and-conquer" technique for parsimony
                    analysis of large data sets, Rec-I-DCM3, and stated that it compares very
                    favorably to results using the program TNT. Their technique is based on
                    selecting subsets of taxa to create reduced data sets or subproblems, finding
                    most parsimonious trees for each reduced data set, recombining all parts
                    together, and then performing global TBR swapping on the combined tree. Here, we
                    contrast this approach to sectorial searches, a divide-and-conquer algorithm
                    implemented in TNT. This algorithm also uses a guide tree to create subproblems,
                    with the first-pass state sets of the nodes that join the selected sectors with
                    the rest of the topology; this allows exact length calculations for the entire
                    topology (that is, any solution N steps shorter than the original, for the
                    reduced subproblem, must also be N steps shorter for the entire topology). We
                    show here that, for sectors of similar size analyzed with the same search
                    algorithms, subdividing data sets with sectorial searches produces better
                    results than subdividing with Rec-I-DCM3. Roshan et al.'s claim that Rec-I-DCM3
                    outperforms the techniques in TNT was caused by a poor experimental design and
                    algorithmic settings used for the runs in TNT. In particular, for finding trees
                    at or very close to the minimum known length of the analyzed datasets, TNT
                    clearly outperforms Rec-I-DCM3. Finally, we show that the performance of
                    Rec-I-DCM3 is bound by the efficiency of TBR implementation for the complete
                    dataset, as this method behaves (after some number of iterations) as a technique
                    for cyclic perturbations and improvements more than as a divide-and-conquer
                    strategy. &#xD; </p>
            </div>
        </front>
        <body/>
        <back/>
    </text>
</TEI>
