<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xmlns:ce="http://www.elsevier.com"
    xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title level="a" type="main">Concubines and power: five hundred years in a northern
                    Nigerian palace</title>
            </titleStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <biblStruct type="article">
                    <analytic>
                        <author>
                            <persName>
                                <forename type="first">Philip</forename>
                                <surname>Howell</surname>
                            </persName>
                            <surname>Howell</surname>
                            <affiliation>Department of Geography, University of
                                Cambridge</affiliation>
                        </author>
                        <title level="a" type="main">Concubines and power: five hundred years in a
                            northern Nigerian palace</title>
                    </analytic>
                    <monogr>
                        <title level="j" type="main">Cultural Geographies</title>
                        <idno type="ISSN">1474-4740</idno>
                        <imprint>
                            <publisher>Sage Publications</publisher>
                            <pubPlace>Sage CA: Thousand Oaks, CA</pubPlace>
                            <biblScope type="vol">14</biblScope>
                            <biblScope type="issue">1</biblScope>
                            <date type="publication" when="2007-01-01"/>
                            <biblScope type="fpage">164</biblScope>
                            <biblScope type="lpage">165</biblScope>
                        </imprint>
                    </monogr>
                    <idno type="doi">10.1177/147447400701400113</idno>
                </biblStruct>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
    </teiHeader>
    <text>
        <front/>
        <body>
            <div type="fullText">
                <head>Full text</head>
                <p> these grand theories effectively push cities like Nairobi, Duoala and elsewhere
                    'off the map' of structural relevance. Ordinary cities offers a new and exciting
                    approach to urban processes. Whilst the grand claim of the book that all cities
                    are ordinary provides a useful starting point for rethinking urban studies, the
                    argument does not as yet provide us with sufficient conceptual clarity that can
                    enable us to differentiate and make distinctions between cities. The
                    anti-hierarchical stance helps us to understand the problems with the modernist
                    and developmentalist bias of conventional urban studies. Yet we also need tools
                    to distinguish between cities if we are to escape the dangers of cultural
                    relativism. Still, Robinson's work provides an important point of departure for
                    developing a postcolonial urban studies. Ordinary cities is a useful book for
                    its telling critiques of modernity and developmentalism. It starts the process
                    of providing an alternative approach that breaks with Western-dominated thinking
                    in urban studies. Department of Sociology AZAT ZANA GU¨ NDOG AN State University
                    of New York MARTIN J. MURRAY Binghamton Concubines and power: five hundred years
                    in a northern Nigerian palace. By Heidi J. Nast. Minneapolis: University of
                    Minneapolis Press. 2005. xxx '/245pp. ISBN 0 8166 4154 4. This excellent study,
                    the outcome of 15 years of field research, concerns the place of concubines in
                    the commercial kingdom of Kano in what is now northern Nigeria. From the
                    sixteenth century, the city-state of Kano was the principal focus of inland West
                    African trade, and Heidi Nast shows here how its political and cultural life
                    depended on the institution of concubinage, particularly as it was developed
                    under Islam, where it was linked to the principles of female seclusion and to
                    the patriarchal centralization of the state. She demonstrates, principally
                    through a socio-spatial extrapolation of the royal palace complex, how Islam
                    reoriented the landscape according to principles of interiority and integrity.
                    The seclusion of women established the symbolic equivalences between gendered
                    bodies and the state's imaginary; but concubine women also played a key economic
                    role in the politico-economic integration of the state, as collectors and
                    administrators of the tax in grain. Concubines were thus key economic and
                    political actors, and Nast clearly identifies the centrality of fertility and
                    reproduction to the life of the kingdom Á and not just the bounty of the land,
                    but also the bearing of children, the state's principal currency. In Kano,
                    concubines were usually prisoners of war, but their children were born free and
                    amongst their number were possible future kings: the management of reproduction
                    thus lay at the core of political life. All this came to an end, predictably
                    enough, with the regional dominance of the British at the beginning of the
                    twentieth century. Though the institutions were on the wane long before this,
                    the British conceived concubinage simply as a form of 164 cultural geographies
                    14(1) slavery, desexualizing it as it was stripped of its political and economic
                    importance, and turning it into the private, domestic affair that it never was.
                    This abjection of the 'harem' dissolved the concubine spaces and turned their
                    inhabitants out into a hostile colonial world. In our own day, with grain
                    delivered by trucks, there is little reminder of this long-lost, complex and
                    multi-layered institution; but Heidi Nast's book recovers and reconstitutes this
                    world. It is an imaginative and innovative contribution to cultural geography.
                    Department of Geography PHILIP HOWELL University of Cambridge Suffering for
                    territory: race, place, and power in Zimbabwe. By Donald S. Moore. Durham, NC:
                    Duke University Press. 2005. 399 pp. $84.95 cloth; $23.95 paper. ISBN 0 8223
                    3582 4 cloth; 0 8223 3570 0 paper. Land tenure reform has been a point of
                    violent conflict in Zimbabwe for several years as white farmers are forced off
                    their farms. Anthropologist Donald Moore grounds the struggle for control over
                    land deep within the colonial and post-1965 Unilateral Declaration of
                    Independence (UDI) era. Moore's text is based on his fieldwork in 1991Á2 in the
                    Kaerezi area along the Mozambique border. Therefore, the book does not address
                    the most recent evictions. However, power and place have been central issues in
                    the region since the colonial era, when external actors located the
                    international border within the territory of Chief Tangwena. Initially the
                    chief's residence was in Mozambique, but he relocated his residence and loyalty
                    to territory within Zimbabwe. The link to Mozambique remains a key issue in two
                    instances. First, residents are identified as long-term residents or recent
                    arrivals depending on whether or not they relocated from Mozambique. Second,
                    Robert Mugabe fled through the Kaerezi region on his way to Mozambique when
                    escaping Ian Smith's forces. These events are indications of Kaerezi's location
                    on the periphery of the national power structure. Portugal was not able to
                    effectively govern the Mozambican section of the territory, nor was Smith able
                    to secure the Zimbabwean area. The post-UDI period saw an intense struggle for
                    land and labour. Moore traces how those who suffered for this land have earnt
                    respect from the residents. While Mugabe's work in the field of Tangwena
                    territory may be literal or figurative, he certainly suffered for the territory
                    and earnt the support of locals. Meanwhile, white farmers were extracting labour
                    from residents on private land. As white farmers attempted to enforce more
                    stringent labour contracts, residents resisted. Moore does a fine job of
                    portraying the struggle between white and black, core and periphery, sufferers
                    and non-sufferers, chief and rainmaker. He emphasizes how these struggles have
                    been fought over land since land is necessary for life in this underdeveloped
                    periphery. There are times when Moore seems to overemphasize this theme, as he
                    repeats claims of locals 'mapping themselves to the land'. 165 Reviews in
                    brief</p>
            </div>
        </body>
    </text>
</TEI>
